[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So I grew up with two
immigrant Indian parents that
came to America really trusting
of the American food system,
and really wanting
to be American.
And so me and my
brother growing up,
we could eat whatever we
wanted when we were little.
So if I wanted McDonald's,
I got McDonald's.
If I wanted Wendy's
or Burger King,
I would get those Happy Meals
every single day if I wanted,
because it was cheap, it
was readily available,
and it was food
that we were eating.
I was really picky child.
I didn't want to eat the
home-cooked Indian meal
my mom was making for
herself and my dad.
It looked funny.
It smelled funny.
I mean, if I'd known
what I know now
about all the medicinal
curries and the health
qualities of
vegetarian cooking, I
would be a totally
different person.
But I really think I had to get
through that stage in my life
to get to where I am today and
to make the impact that I'm
making today.
Because as a result of my
terrible food habits growing up
and my lack of education
about nutrition,
it led to a lot of
different health issues.
And those health issues,
overcoming asthma, eczema,
allergies, endometriosis,
having my appendix taken out,
all of those episodes of
being in and out of hospitals
and doctor's offices
really created passion
in me to start taking
back control of my health,
and to make it a
priority to figure out
what I'd been doing wrong.
And when I started to question
all the things that I'd
been taught about
food and started
to do my own research into
what was truly healthy,
my mind was blown.
I found out that
the majority of food
that I'd been eating for
most of my life was dead,
processed food, that
it had been invented
in a laboratory full
of different chemicals,
largely not even
tested for human use,
just approved by
the manufacturer
themselves instead of the FDA,
no one really even looking
over these chemicals.
And that I was eating this
non-food in abundance.
And no wonder my body was
sick, because it wasn't getting
the nutrients it needed.
And so when I started to
make radical changes, started
to reduce the amount of
processed foods in my diet,
started to eat a whole
plant-based, organic, whole
foods diet, my body
completely changed.
Not only did I get off all
of my prescription drugs,
which I was on eight at
one point in my life,
I, for the first time, was
able to maintain my weight
without dieting, really try
to take a hold of my energy,
started to feel better than I've
ever felt in my entire life.
And it was a way of
life that I couldn't
believe that other people
were not following.
And so I was
shouting everything I
was learning through the
rooftops to my friends,
through my family,
and they started
calling me the food police.
They were really upset
when I'd go to their houses
and start looking
through their pantries
and pointing out all of the
different chemical additives
that they were eating and what
those chemical additives were
doing to their body and all
the risks associated with them.
And eventually, they had
enough, and so I said, well,
why don't I start a blog?
Why don't I share
this information
that I'm learning
to the people who
really are the willing, the
ones who want to change.
And when I started
doing that, not only
did a lot of my
friends and my family
get on board as a result,
but we created a movement.
And I was working in
the corporate world
at the time in a very
high-stress, six-figure job
where I was reporting
to C-level executives
at some of the biggest financial
institutions in the world.
And on the other hand, at home,
when I'd get home from work,
I would literally not watch
TV, gave up television
so that I could research and
write and share information
about the chemicals
in food, and what
I was learning about
the food industry,
and what I was doing with my
own body, and all the recipes
I was making at home.
And when I started to realize
that that passion for getting
people to stop their
suffering, because I
had suffered so much
in my life and really
my mission was to
stop unnecessary
suffering all of a sudden.
And I realized my job,
my six-figure salary,
my way of life in
that corporate world
had such little meaning
compared to helping
people end that suffering.
And eventually,
a year and a half
after starting the blog,
quit my job cold turkey,
was not making any money
being the Food Babe
or writing as the Food
Babe under this name,
because I really wanted
to hide my identity.
I didn't want my
bosses to figure out
who I was or anyone
else for that matter.
I was really scared
to be online.
I was never on social media
even before starting the blog.
And so you just
weren't on social media
as a corporate citizen, because
you didn't want your boss
to find your personal pictures.
And you didn't spend time
on Facebook and Twitter
as a corporate citizen.
And so for me this
was a whole new world.
And what happened is as soon
as I started to really branch
out and tell people who
I am after I quit my job,
things started to
happen magically.
Not only did I take on
one of the largest food
manufacturers in the world--
Kraft Food-- for
the artificial food
dyes that they were
using in their products,
but I suddenly became a
spotlight, a feature all
over the news internationally
for this work,
and started to highlight issues
about the ethical and moral
standards of food development.
For example, we found out that
one of my first investigations
that I did as soon
as I quit my job--
because suddenly I
had all of this time--
was to compare products being
sold in the United States
to other parts of the world.
And we found out that our
own American companies
were reformulating
our favorite products
to be healthier for
citizens overseas and not
for their own Americans.
And one product was Kraft
macaroni and cheese,
which in Europe, if it has--
if a product has
artificial food dyes,
it says may cause adverse
effects on activity
and attention in children.
Well, Kraft Foods
had figured that out,
said we're not going to put a
warning label on our products
overseas.
We're just going to take out
that artificial food dye.
And that stance to only
take out artificial food
dye for some citizens
across the globe
and not all citizens
is completely immoral
and unethical.
Because if they know that
there is an ingredient that
could be risky to children, or
could be harmful to children,
or contribute to ADHD, or
contribute to hyperactivity,
I think food corporations
have an obligation
to make their products as
healthy across the board.
And so pointing out
that discrepancy
opened up a Pandora's box of
food activism and social media
frenzy of moms and
dads and everyone
sharing this information
so voraciously to the point
where these
corporations couldn't
do anything but listen
to us and start to remove
some of these chemicals.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The majority of food
products in grocery stores
are manufactured for
one reason only--
to increase profit
of food companies.
The majority of
food companies that
are ruling the food
industry are actually
American-based companies.
So they rely on
capitalistic mentalities
and so their purpose is to
make as much money as possible.
And when you have that driving
your goals as a food company,
it's very hard to come back
and make health a priority.
Because health is real,
natural, whole foods that
have very little processing.
And it's cheaper to make
artificial food dyes than use
dyes from beets, and
carrots, and strawberries,
and blueberries.
And the food industry
has figured this out
and they've hired very
intense scientists
to figure this
stuff out for them.
I mean, the same scientists that
created addiction in tobacco,
they've hired to create
addiction in food.
And so they're using
our brains and the way
our body responds to
food to their advantage
to continue for us to
be addicted to really
super cheap processed food.
And we're in this never-ending
cycle of purchasing this food,
thinking we're
going to get full,
but we're really
empty on nutrition.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So one of the things that
I really want people to do
is completely ignore
the marketing of food.
All of the fancy
buzzwords they put
on the front of the package--
the low-fat, low-calorie,
gluten-free--
all of those things--
forget about it.
You have to look at
one thing and that
is the ingredients in food.
And if you don't
recognize an ingredient,
you need to put the
product back on the shelf
or learn about that ingredient.
And I think informed consumers
are the most beautiful part
of this catalyst of change
in the food revolution.
Because once you become aware
of how processed our food is
and what chemical
additives the food industry
has invented to
put in our foods,
you do not want to be part of
that experiment any longer.
You want to opt-out of that.
You don't want to bring in
those chemical additives
to your family every single day.
I'm about to be a mom
and I know I'm not
going to feed my child these
chemical additives that
have been invented
in the last 50 years,
largely to do one
thing, which is
to improve the bottom
line of the food industry.
They're not invented
to improve our health.
What I would like to do is
challenge the food scientists
of today.
Find ingredients and
find ways to make
food improve our health, not
just improve the bottom line.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, when I started to
look into why we've been so
conditioned to think that we
need a Gatorade or a Powerade
after a workout,
or why athletes are
reliant upon these
different concoctions
in order to perform, I found
out that over 40 years ago
the sports drink industry
actually paid scientists
to convince moms and convince
the public that their child
would not be hydrated enough
during regular sports events,
that their child needed
this extra nourishment,
and that without it you were
putting your child at risk.
That is absolutely false.
The majority of
children out there
who do sports activities need
one thing and that is water.
And it goes even greater than
the sports drink industry,
into the soda industry
and to the big names--
Pepsi and Coca Cola--
who have paid scientists
over the years
to say that diet soda and
diet drinks are better
for people than actual water.
And that's absolutely
false, too,
because when you look
at a lot of these sports
drinks and performance
drinks, they
have artificial
sugars in them, they
have artificial ingredients
that not only wreak havoc
on hyperactivity in
children, but they also
wreak havoc in your brain and
how your brain processes sugar.
And when you think you're
getting sugar, but not actually
getting sugar, your brain starts
to crave more and more sugar.
So you're in a never ending
cycle of obesity at that point.
And that's really what
we have to change.
We have these really--
when I look at the
grocery store shelf
and I see the array of all the
different colored sports drinks
and what's actually in
them, I completely cringe
and I can't believe that
athletes and children
across the nation at schools
and at sporting events, as well
as doctors giving it to
children when they're sick,
and having it in hospitals.
I mean, having all of
these different chemical
compounds in a drink to try
to make someone feel better
doesn't make any sense.
It absolutely robs
the body of nutrition.
I mean, there's synthetic
vitamins in there.
There's artificial ingredients.
There's-- the amount of sugar
in there is not what the body
really needs to handle.
We need water to hydrate
and we need that message
to be heard across the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have athletes pushing
these chemical concoctions
to little kids.
Sports drinks full
of artificial food
dye-- artificial food
dye that's linked
to hyperactivity in children.
Hyperactivity that's now leading
to more increases in ADHD.
I can't tell you how many
parents I have spoken to
and have received
letters from, when
they remove these artificial
food dyes from their child's
diet, how much their
attention improves,
how they get better at school.
A lot of their
allergies go away.
Their skin issues go away.
Because these artificial
food dyes not only
are linked to
hyperactivity, they're
linked to all sorts of
different allergies in kids,
as well as in lab rats--
leukemia.
I mean, the blue number one
coloring is linked to leukemia.
You look at the Center for
Science and Public Interest,
a group that is out of
Washington DC, who's
made it their life's
mission to research
the science behind
these chemicals,
and they've lobbied for the ban
of these chemicals from the FDA
for so long.
And it's taken parents and
regular everyday citizens
to rise up and decide not to
purchase these artificial food
dyes to really get
manufacturers to listen.
Now for the first time
there's an organic Gatorade
being introduced.
That would have never been
possible without this movement
that we've created
online and the movement
to really understand
what these chemicals are
doing in our bodies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So one of the most famous food
chains in the world is Subway.
Their motto-- eat fresh.
But when you really look
into the ingredients-- when
I decided to say, why is it that
I don't eat that food anymore?
It just tastes process.
What's going on there?
And I decided to look
into the ingredients.
One of the ingredients I found
was called azodicarbonamide.
I mean, this is a
mouthful of an ingredient.
But it's also the same
chemical that they use
in yoga mats and shoe rubber.
And I found out this chemical
was banned all over the globe--
Australia.
They'll fine you
and put you in jail
if you use it in Singapore.
It's banned in Europe.
And I found that Subway wasn't
using this chemical overseas,
but was using it in other parts
of the world where they got
away with it, where
their governments
and their regulatory
agencies were lax
and allowed this chemical
in the food supply.
And when I decided to
start a petition on Subway
to remove this chemical, it
wasn't so much about this one
chemical.
It was really to
highlight the fact
that we've all been hoodwinked.
We thought we were eating
fresh, when really we weren't.
And so many other fast
food chains out there
are getting away with
this misleading marketing.
And finally, given this
example and the way that Subway
responded to this campaign
by immediately agreeing
to remove this chemical, it
showed the American consumer
and it showed the
people worldwide
who read the press and
the worldwide coverage
of this campaign that
they need to look
into the ingredients
of what they're eating,
and really understand
what they're eating
and ignore the marketing from
these major food corporations.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You know as a mom-to-be,
I'm really concerned
about the marketing
to children because I
hope that I can create a really
great, positive, healthy food
environment at
home for my child.
But as soon as my child
leaves this house, it's over.
And I'll tell you
everything from television
to school fundraisers
to advertising
in the weirdest of places,
there is a constant barrage
of pressure from
the food industry
to get kids to adopt
their latest products,
because that's their
newest customer.
They want children.
They want the young people
to be addicted to their food,
so that their taste buds get
accustomed to those processed
ingredients, that
hidden MSG that's
in just about every
processed food, and all
of those different invented
ways to use chemicals together
to create addiction.
And it's up to
parents really to try
to educate children about
the chemicals in food
and teach them about
ingredients very early on.
My goal is to really
teach my daughter
one day about all of
the chemicals in food
that so that she can
read ingredient lists
from the moment she can read.
And she'll know what
artificial food dyes are
and she'll know what these
different chemicals in food
are doing.
And so she can look at
the back of the package
and make a decision for herself,
and make an informed decision.
And she might choose to
still eat those Skittles,
like most kids would,
but at least it's
going to be an
informed decision.
And that is the best
hope that I can do,
because when I look
back at my childhood,
I didn't know anything
about these chemicals.
And to have that
knowledge, and to be
able to give that knowledge
and spread that knowledge
through children is going to
be the most impactful thing
we can do.
And that is what's
going to help them
break free from the marketing.
They're going to be able
to call out the bullshit
and that's going to
be exciting to watch.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When Tom Brady said that Frosted
Flakes wasn't fit for children
and that Coca Cola was poisoned,
I screamed from the rooftops.
I was like finally, an athlete
sticking up for children
and really telling the truth
about the food industry.
And we need more role
models and more athletes
to take that plunge and
to be that courageous,
because I tell you
it is important
for the overall
health of this world
that we get the true message
about food out to our children.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We've been hoodwinked
about sugar.
We've had companies
who rely on sugar,
like the big soda
companies, paying scientists
to say that saturated fat
was making us unhealthy,
causing heart disease, causing
obesity, and not actual sugar.
And so our eyes have been off
the ball for many, many years,
having a different villain.
But really the villain
has been sugar.
And to think that
sugar is being added
to 80% of processed
foods on the market,
and knowing that that
sugar is directly related
to diabetes, heart disease,
obesity, autoimmune disorders,
all sorts of diseases,
we have an obligation
to do something to
educate the public
about the dangers of sugar.
And one way to
educate the public
to do that is through tax, just
the way cigarettes are taxed
and the way alcohol is taxed.
I think it makes
sense to do that,
but I think something
grander needs
to be done than just a tax.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Many years ago I
took up acupuncture
as a way for
preventative medicine
to keep me out of the
modern medical system,
to keep me out of that
cycle of prescription drugs
and constantly putting
band-aids on things
and not really finding
the root cause.
And one of the things that I
learned from my acupuncturist
is that all disease
stems from the gut.
And if you look at
the body that way
and you think about all the
things that we've been eating,
all the pesticides
we're being exposed to,
all the chemical additives
all of the plasticizers that
are in the plastic wrapping
and all of the other things
that come with food on the go,
our guts are constantly
under turmoil and under war
to keep healthy
bacteria in there.
When we're eating wheat
that has been pre-harvested
with glyphosate, a
chemical that is shown
to create little tiny
holes in your gut
and leak out good
bacteria, and when
we're eating these
carbohydrates in abundance,
our gut are
completely destroyed.
One of the most beneficial
ways to start paying attention
to our guts is to add foods that
create a healthy environment
for bacteria--
probiotic foods like fermented
kimchi, and tempeh, and miso,
and sauerkraut.
And start to put prebiotic
foods in your diet like radishes
and radicchio and all of
these beautiful vegetables
that you don't know what to
do with but they actually
add a component to your gut
and your digestive system
to make it all work beautifully.
And when you start
paying attention
to repairing your gut, things
start to automatically start
to work better in your body.
And you see on supermarket
shelves everywhere
things are being formulated
to include probiotics.
They're adding probiotics
to a lot of things.
Now, this is similar to
what the food industry did
when they found out we had
vitamin D deficiency or calcium
deficiency.
They started adding
it to orange juice.
And that's not the true way
to get these probiotics.
You really have to
go back to basics,
and create foods that
are fermented naturally
and are healthy through--
fermented cabbage that comes
through kimchi, or sauerkraut,
or a yogurt that is
fermented naturally
that hasn't been
processed to death
full of artificial
ingredients and pasteurized
at a very high temperature.
We need to go back to real foods
that are made traditionally
to restore that gut bacteria.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There's a good way
to go gluten-free
and there's a bad way
to go gluten-free.
The good way is to
go back to basics.
Quinoa, brown rice, nuts,
seeds, fruits, vegetables--
that's the good way
to go gluten-free.
The other way is the way the
food industry has figured out
a way to make more
money in this industry,
because they realize people are
feeling better when they reduce
the amount of wheat in their
diet and gluten in their diet.
So they've created
a new category
of foods that is going to be
another huge billion dollar
industry of foods that
have been, again, created
in the laboratory to improve
the bottom line of the food
industry.
So they've figured
out how can we
make gluten-free foods
without wheat and gluten
and still get people to buy
these cheap hyper-processed
foods.
And so they've
created these products
with low quality ingredients,
high starchy ingredients that
raise the blood sugar
just as much as some
of the wheat and
gluten products.
And they've increased the
amount of additives in them
to make them work together.
Different stabilizers
like carrageenan
that's linked to
intestinal issues and IBS.
They add all sorts of
other types of additives
to keep it shelf-stable.
And that's stuff we just
don't want in our body.
And so if you're going
gluten-free to be healthy,
don't rely on the food industry
to create products for you.
Go back to basics.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Everybody's different.
We all require
different nutrients.
Our bodies are
not created equal.
And so there isn't really
one diet for everyone,
but there are some principles
that do work for everyone.
And that is, we don't need
processed food in our diet.
We do not need the cookies,
the cakes, the chips, the soda,
in order to survive.
We need whole, real, natural,
plant-based, animal-based foods
that have come from the earth,
that nourish us naturally.
And that is the
ideal diet for anyone
to follow to immediately
start to feel better.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Your diet is not working
for you if you're
in a never-ending cycle of
losing weight, gaining weight,
losing weight, gaining weight.
When you're on the diet
that's ideal for you,
eating becomes effortless.
It becomes a way of life.
Your cravings are stabilized.
Your body is full of energy.
Your reliance on outside
prescription drugs
starts to diminish.
Your reliance on outside
therapy start to diminish.
And you realize you can
get just about everything
you need from food.
And until you get to that
point, I say keep experimenting.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Once you start to get in
a rhythm with good food,
you want to start to
achieve a level of health
that you never
thought was possible.
And one way to do that is
start to work on your mind.
And benefits through
exercise, through meditation,
through yoga, can really take
your health to another level.
And for people who really
want to become well,
that is another
avenue to really start
to achieve everlasting health.
And whether you start there
and then you go to food
or you start with food
and then go there,
it doesn't really matter because
it all starts to meld together.
And overall wellness has
that big mind component.
I mean, I can tell you right now
if I didn't have a strong mind,
I wouldn't be able to
do the work that I'm
doing now in the food industry.
I wouldn't be able to take
on these corporate giants
had I felt sick, or felt bad, or
wasn't taking care of my stress
or anxiety levels through
meditation, and yoga
and exercise.
And now that I've been able to
achieve this level of health,
it's not only helped
me personally,
but it's helped me become
more successful, and reach
more people, and create a
higher calling for myself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So when I started Food Babe it
was really kind of an accident
that I became an activist.
The goal of the
blog was to really
just teach people about what was
happening in the food industry.
I had no idea the food
industry would actually
react, and actually take
out some of the ingredients,
and start to make major changes
and overhauls to their product
lines as a result of
what I was writing.
And when they did
start to respond,
I realized I had
a higher calling
in this world than to work
in the corporate world.
It was really to take
on this new challenge
of changing the food industry.
And at first I was
super scared, because I
didn't have the courage to
let go of those principles
that I'd been in--
that had been
instilled in me since I
was very young from my parents,
which was you need a 401(k),
you need a steady job, you need
a salary in order to survive.
And I was a very ambitious
person and I had a great job.
And to give that
up for the unknown
was a very tough thing to do.
But I eventually did it
and I made the decision
actually on the
top of Machu Picchu
during a Christmas vacation.
And when I made the decision,
I looked over at my husband
and I said, you know this is it.
I'm going to quit
when I get back
and I'm going to do this
Food Babe thing full time.
And we're going to take
on the food industry.
And I expected him to say,
well, what about your salary?
How are we going to survive?
Are we going to be
able to make it?
Instead he said, what
have you been waiting for?
And everyone around me was
encouraging me and cheering me
on, and it was
really me that I had
to make that decision for myself
and I had to find that courage.
And when I did find that
courage and when I came back
from that vacation in January,
where I'm sitting on the couch
like surrounded by the
buildings I used to work in
in downtown Charlotte of all
these financial institutions,
and not having a boss,
not having a paycheck,
and going, oh my gosh, I've
got to figure this out,
I've got to figure out
what I'm doing here.
It was a very scary time.
But as soon as I started to
focus 100% of my energy instead
of just part of my
energy on this mission,
things started to
change dramatically.
Not only did some of the largest
food corporations in the world
start to change as a
result, we built an army,
a movement of people out
there who care about what's
in their food and
holding these companies
accountable for their actions.
And it's changing the food
industry faster than ever.
And I can't in a million
years think that I would ever
go back and work at my old job.
I mean, I would--
even if I won the
lottery, I wouldn't
quit what I'm doing today
because it's so meaningful.
My mission, again, is to
end the suffering that I
see so many people go through.
They're walking around
like zombies on this--
addicted to this
processed food, addicted
to these sugary
drinks, and addicted
to a way of life that doesn't
serve their well-being
and doesn't serve their health.
And they don't know
what's possible.
Because I can tell you I
didn't know what was possible
before I got healthy.
And I want them to
feel as good as I do.
And that is why I do this
work every single day
and why I'm going to continue
to do this until the day I die,
because I know I
can reach people.
And knowing that
people are changing
as a result of this information
and improving their lives,
keeps me going every single day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My very good mentor and
friend Gabby Bernstein
has this saying--
the universe has your back.
And when you find your passion
and your higher calling
and you start to serve
others, the universe
will have your back
and it will give you
the tools necessary to succeed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In order to have lasting
fulfillment in life,
I think you need to realize
that this world in this life
is just bigger than yourself.
That you are just one
piece of the puzzle,
you are one mechanism
of this world.
And once you realize
that the work that you do
serves a greater
purpose and the work
that you do supports
more than yourself,
you start to live a life
that if you died tomorrow,
you would be perfectly content.
And that is really how
I want to live my life.
If I died tomorrow,
I would feel really
good about the impact
and the amount of effort
that I gave back to the world
to make it a better place.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So a famous Buddhist
monk, Thich Nhat Hanh,
says no mud, no lotus.
And that is a phrase
that has really guided me
through being an activist,
and to really go up
against huge food conglomerates
and chemical companies that
want to do whatever they can
to prevent you from getting
this information out.
And hearing that phrase,
no mud, no lotus,
reminds me that
without the struggle,
we can't have progress.
[MUSIC PLAYING]